Document the SchemaConformingTransformer. (#238)
pinot-contrib/pinot-docs: basics/data-import/schema-conforming-transformer.md

---
description: Storing records with dynamic schemas in a table with a fixed schema.
---

> # Ingesting Records with Dynamic Schemas

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Ingest records with dynamic schemas
```

> Some domains (e.g., logging) generate records where each record can have a different set of keys, whereas Pinot tables have a relatively static schema. Since these records have varying keys, it is impractical to store each field in its own table column. At the same time, most (if not all) fields may be important to the user, so we should not drop any field unnecessarily.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In some cases (for example, logging), when records are generated, each record has a different set of keys. For records with varying keys, it’s impractical to store each field in its own table column. Also, each field may be important, so fields are not dropped unnecessarily.
```

> The [SchemaConformingTransformer](https://github.com/apache/pinot/blob/master/pinot-segment-local/src/main/java/org/apache/pinot/segment/local/recordtransformer/SchemaConformingTransformer.java) is a [RecordTransformer](https://github.com/apache/pinot/blob/master/pinot-segment-local/src/main/java/org/apache/pinot/segment/local/recordtransformer/RecordTransformer.java) that can transform records with dynamic schemas such that they can be ingested in a table with a static schema. The transformer primarily takes record-fields that don't exist in the schema and stores them in a type of catchall field.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use the [SchemaConformingTransformer](https://github.com/apache/pinot/blob/master/pinot-segment-local/src/main/java/org/apache/pinot/segment/local/recordtransformer/SchemaConformingTransformer.java) as a [RecordTransformer](https://github.com/apache/pinot/blob/master/pinot-segment-local/src/main/java/org/apache/pinot/segment/local/recordtransformer/RecordTransformer.java) to transform records with a dynamic schema to ingest into a static schema table. The transformer primarily takes record fields that don't exist in the schema and stores them in a type of catchall field.
```

For example, consider this record:

```json
{
  "timestamp": 1687786535928,
  "hostname": "host1",
  "HOSTNAME": "host1",
  "level": "INFO",
  "message": "Started processing job1",
  "tags": {
    "platform": "data",
    "service": "serializer",
    "params": {
      "queueLength": 5,
      "timeout": 299,
      "userData_noIndex": {
        "nth": 99
      }
    }
  }
}
```

> And let's say the table's schema contains these fields:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's say the table's schema contains the following fields:
```

* timestamp
* hostname
* level
* message
* tags.platform
* tags.service
* indexableExtras
* unindexableExtras

Without this transformer, the `HOSTNAME` field and the entire `tags` field would be dropped when storing the record in the table. However, with this transformer, the record would be transformed into the following:

```json
{
  "timestamp": 1687786535928,
  "hostname": "host1",
  "level": "INFO",
  "message": "Started processing job1",
  "tags.platform": "data",
  "tags.service": "serializer",
  "indexableExtras": {
    "tags": {
      "params": {
        "queueLength": 5,
        "timeout": 299
      }
    }
  },
  "unindexableExtras": {
    "tags": {
      "userData_noIndex": {
        "nth": 99
      }
    }
  }
}
```

> Notice that the transformer:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Notice that the transformer does the following:
```

* Flattens nested fields which exist in the schema, like `tags.platform`

> * Drops some fields like `HOSTNAME`, where `HOSTNAME` must be listed as a field in the config option `fieldPathsToDrop`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Drops some fields like `HOSTNAME`, where `HOSTNAME` must be listed as a field in the config option `fieldPathsToDrop`
```

> * Moves fields which don't exist in the schema and have the suffix `_noIndex` into the `unindexableExtras` field (the field name is configurable)
> * Moves any remaining fields which don't exist in the schema into the `indexableExtras` field (the field name is configurable)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Moves fields that don't exist in the schema and have the suffix `_noIndex` into the `unindexableExtras` field (the field name is configurable)
* Moves any remaining fields that don't exist in the schema into the `indexableExtras` field (the field name is configurable)
```

Reviewer: does "the field name is configurable" mean that the suffix could be "_noIndex" or be configured to be something else? or does it mean that "userData" could be any field? if it means the latter, think we can drop as understood by this being an example

Author: I meant that the destination field could have a different name than "indexableExtras" (e.g., "extras"). But I agree, it's confusing which one we're referring to, so I dropped it.

> The `unindexableExtras` field allows the transformer to separate fields which don't need indexing (because they are only retrieved, not searched) from those that do.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `unindexableExtras` field allows the transformer to separate fields that don't need indexing (because they are only retrieved, not searched) from those that do
```

## SchemaConformingTransformer Configuration

> Users can use the transformer by specifying it in the `ingestionConfig` section of their table's configuration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To use the transformer, add the `schemaConformingTransformerConfig` option in the `ingestionConfig` section of your table configuration, as shown in the following example.
```

For example:

```json
{
  "ingestionConfig": {
    "schemaConformingTransformerConfig": {
      "indexableExtrasField": "extras",
      "unindexableExtrasField": "extrasNoIndex",
      "unindexableFieldSuffix": "_no_index",
      "fieldPathsToDrop": [
        "HOSTNAME"
      ]
    }
  }
}
```

> All possible configuration options are listed in [SchemaConformingTransformerConfig](https://github.com/apache/pinot/blob/master/pinot-spi/src/main/java/org/apache/pinot/spi/config/table/ingestion/SchemaConformingTransformerConfig.java).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Available configuration options are listed in [SchemaConformingTransformerConfig](https://github.com/apache/pinot/blob/master/pinot-spi/src/main/java/org/apache/pinot/spi/config/table/ingestion/SchemaConformingTransformerConfig.java).
```
